# Getting the code right

This section focuses on the coding standards, styles, and compilation settings all Argo software must follow.

## Coding styles

This short subsection describes the preferred coding style for the Argo software. Coding style is very personal, and I won't force my views on anybody, but this is what goes for anything that I have to be able to maintain, and I'd prefer it for most other things too. Please at least consider the points made here.

### 1) Indentation

Tabs are 8 characters, and thus indentations are also 8 characters. For writing **HTML** tabs should be 4 characters. While this is inconsistent, HTML files would become unreadable otherwise.

Rationale: The whole idea behind indentation is to clearly define where a block of control starts and ends. Especially when you've been looking at your screen for 20 straight hours, you'll find it a lot easier to see how the indentation works if you have large indentations.

The preferred way to ease multiple indentation levels in a `switch` statement is to align the `switch` and its subordinate `case` labels in the same column instead of `double-indenting` the `case` labels. E.g.:

```c
switch (suffix) {
case 'A':
case 'a':
        do_this();
        break;
case 'B':
case 'b':
        do_that();
        break;
default:
        break;
}
```

Don't put multiple statements on a single line unless you have something to hide:

```c
if (condition) do_this;
        do_something_everytime;
```

Don't use commas to avoid using braces:
```c
if (condition)
        do_this(), do_that();
```

Always uses braces for multiple statements:

```c
if (condition) {
        do_this();
        do_that();
}
```

Don't put multiple assignments on a single line either.

Never use spaces as indentation.

Get a decent editor and don't leave whitespace at the end of lines.

### 2) Breaking long lines and strings

Coding style is all about readability and maintainability using commonly available tools.

The preferred limit on the length of a single line is 80 columns.

Statements longer than 80 columns should be broken into sensible chunks, unless exceeding 80 columns significantly increases readability and does not hide information.

Descendants are always substantially shorter than the parent and are placed substantially to the right. A very commonly used style is to align descendants to a function open parenthesis.

These same rules are applied to function headers with a long argument list.

### 3) Placing braces and spaces

For languages that require the use of curly braces `{ }` the opening brace should be put on the end of a line, and the closing brace should be on a separate line, thusly:

```c
if (x is true) {
        we do y
}
```

This applies to all statement blocks (if, switch, for, while, do, functions). E.g.:
```c
switch (suffix) {
case 'A':
case 'a':
        do_this();
        break;
case 'B':
case 'b':
        do_that();
        break;
default:
        break;
}
```

Note that the closing brace is empty on a line of its own, except in the cases where it is followed by a continuation of the same statement, ie a while in a do-statement or an else in an if-statement, like this:

```c
do {
        body of do-loop
} while (condition);
```

this:

```c
typedef struct {
        body of struct
} StructName;
```

and this:

```c
if (x == y) {
        ...
} else if {x > y) {
        ...
} else {
        ...
}
```

Also, note that this brace-placement also minimizes the number of empty (or almost empty) lines, without any loss of readability.

Do not unnecessarily use braces where a single statement will do.

```c
if (condition)
        action();
```

and

```c
if (condition)
        do_this();
else
        do_that();
```

This does not apply if only one branch of a conditional statement is a single statement; in the latter case use braces in both branches:

```c
if (condition) {
        do_this();
        do_that();
} else {
        otherwise();
}
```

Also, use braces when a loop contains more than a single simple statement:

```c
while (condition) {
        if (test)
                do_something();
}
```

#### 3.1) Spaces

Spaces should be put after the following keywords:

`if, switch, case, for, do, while`

Do not add spaces around (inside) parenthesized expressions. This example is **bad**:
```c
s = sizeof( struct file );
```

Use one space around (on each side of) most binary and ternary operators, such as any of these:

`=  +  -  <  >  *  /  %  |  &  ^  <=  >=  ==  !=  ?  :`

but no space after unary operators:

`&  *  +  -  ~  !`

no space before the postfix increment & decrement unary operators:

`++ --`

no space after the prefix increment & decrement unary operators:

`++ --`

For C/C++ there are two additional rules.

When declaring pointer data or a function that returns a pointer type, the preferred use of * is adjacent to the data name or function name and not adjacent to the type name. Examples:

```c
char *users;
unsigned long long memory_parse(char *ptr, char **retptr);
char *message(substring_t *s);
```

and no space around the `.` and `->` structure member operators.

Do not leave trailing whitespace at the ends of lines. Some editors with smart indentation will insert whitespace at the beginning of new lines as appropriate, so you can start typing the next line of code right away. However, some such editors do not remove the whitespace if you end up not putting a line of code there, such as if you leave a blank line. As a result, you end up with lines containing trailing whitespace.

Git will warn you about patches that introduce trailing whitespace, and can optionally strip the trailing whitespace for you; however, if applying a series of patches, this may make later patches in the series fail by changing their context lines.

### 4) Naming

**GLOBAL** variables (to be used only if you really need them) need to have descriptive names, as do global functions. If you have a function that counts the number of active users, you should call that `count_active_users()` or similar, you should not call it `cntusr()`.

**LOCAL** variable names should be short, and to the point. If you have some random integer loop counter, it should probably be called `i`. Calling it `loop_counter` is non-productive, if there is no chance of it being mis-understood. Similarly, `tmp` can be just about any type of variable that is used to hold a temporary value.

For symbol names and documentation, avoid introducing new usage of 'master / slave' (or 'slave' independent of 'master') and 'blacklist / whitelist'.


**_Recommended replacements for 'master / slave' are:_**
'{primary,main} / {secondary,replica,subordinate}' '{initiator,requester} / {target,responder}' '{controller,host} / {device,worker,proxy}' 'leader / follower' 'director / performer'

**_Recommended replacements for 'blacklist/whitelist' are:_**
'denylist / allowlist' 'blocklist / passlist'

### 5) Functions

Functions should be short and sweet, and do just one thing. They should fit on one or two screenfuls of text (the ISO/ANSI screen size is 80x24, as we all know), and do one thing and do that well.

The maximum length of a function is inversely proportional to the complexity and indentation level of that function. So, if you have a conceptually simple function that is just one long (but simple) case-statement, where you have to do lots of small things for a lot of different cases, it's OK to have a longer function.

However, if you have a complex function, and you suspect that a less-than-gifted first-year high-school student might not even understand what the function is all about, you should adhere to the maximum limits all the more closely. Use helper functions with descriptive names

Local variables of a function shouldn't exceed 5-10. If it exceeds this limit it should be split into smaller pieces.

Functions shouldn't take more than 8 arguments and as stated above, they should be split into smaller pieces.

#### 5.1) Additional function rules for C/C++

In source files, separate functions with one blank line. If the function is exported, the EXPORT macro for it should follow immediately after the closing function brace line. E.g.:
```c
int system_is_up(void)
{
        return system_state == SYSTEM_RUNNING;
}
EXPORT_SYMBOL(system_is_up);
```

In function prototypes, include parameter names with their data types. Although this is not required by the C language, it is preferred because it is a simple way to add valuable information for the reader.

Do not use the `extern` keyword with function declarations as this makes lines longer and isn't strictly necessary.

### 6) Function return values and names

Functions can return values of many different kinds, and one of the most common is a value indicating whether the function succeeded or failed. Such a value can be represented as an error-code integer (-Exxx = failure, 0 = success) or a succeeded boolean (0 = failure, non-zero = success).

Mixing up these two sorts of representations is a fertile source of difficult-to-find bugs. To help prevent such bugs, always follow this convention:

```
If the name of a function is an action or an imperative command,
the function should return an error-code integer.  If the name
is a predicate, the function should return a "succeeded" boolean.
```

For example, `read temperature` is a command, and the read_temperature() function returns 0 for success or -EBUSY for failure. In the same way, `Arduino connected` is a predicate, and the arduino_connected() function returns a 1 if it succeeds in finding an Arduino device or 0 if it doesn't.

All EXPORTed functions must respect this convention, and so should all public functions. Private (static) functions need not, but it is recommended that they do.

Functions whose return value is the actual result of a computation, rather than an indication of whether the computation succeeded, are not subject to this rule. Generally they indicate failure by returning some out-of-range result. Typical examples would be functions that return pointers; they use NULL or the ERR_PTR mechanism to report failure.

### 7) Centralized exiting of functions

This primarily applies for C/C++ as software that is written in them is most likely to use goto's.

Albeit deprecated by some people, the equivalent of the goto statement is used frequently by compilers in form of the unconditional jump instruction.

The goto statement comes in handy when a function exits from multiple locations and some common work such as cleanup has to be done. If there is no cleanup needed then just return directly.

Choose label names which say what the goto does or why the goto exists. An example of a good name could be `out_free_buffer`: if the goto frees a `buffer`. Avoid using basic names like `err1`: and `err2`:, as you would have to renumber them if you ever add or remove exit paths, and they make correctness difficult to verify anyway.

The rationale for using goto's is:

- unconditional statements are easier to understand and follow
- nesting is reduced
- errors by not updating individual exit points when making modifications are prevented
- saves the compiler work to optimize redundant code away

```c
int function(int a) {
        int result = 0;
        char *buffer;
        
        buffer = malloc(SIZE);
        
        if (!buffer)
                return -1;
        
        if (condition) {
                while (loop) {
                        ...
                }
                result = 1;
                goto out_free_buffer;
        }
        ...
        out_free_buffer:
                free(buffer);
                return result;
}
```

Ideally you should simulate errors to test all exit paths.

### 8) Using bool

Use of bool is encouraged to improve readability and is often a better option than 'int' for storing boolean values.

Bool values can only evaluate to 0 or 1, and implicit or explicit conversion to bool automatically converts the value to true or false.

When working with bool values the true and false definitions should be used instead of 1 and 0.

### 9) Commenting

Comments are good, but there is also a danger of over-commenting. NEVER try to explain HOW your code works in a comment: it's much better to write the code so that the working is obvious, and it's a waste of time to explain badly written code.

Generally, you want your comments to tell WHAT your code does, not HOW. Also, try to avoid putting comments inside a function body: if the function is so complex that you need to separately comment parts of it, you should probably go back to chapter 5. You can make small comments to note or warn about something particularly clever (or ugly), but try to avoid excess. Instead, put the comments at the head of the function, telling people what it does, and possibly WHY it does it.

The preferred style for long (multi-line) comments is:
```c
/*
 * This is the preferred style for multi-line
 * comments inside Argo stoftware.
 * Please use it consistently.
 *
 * Description: A column of * (Or other symbols
 * depending on language) on the left side, with
 * beginning and ending almost-blank lines.
 */
```

**HTML** is the only language where the comments don't need to have a symbol on the left side of a multi-line comment.

It's also important to comment data, whether they are basic types or derived types. To this end, use just one data declaration per line (no commas for multiple data declarations). This leaves you room for a small comment on each item, explaining its use.

## Compiling C/C++ code

All C code shall be compiled as C11 (ISO C 2011).

All C++ code shall be compiled as ISO C++ 2017.

**All C/C++ code _shall_ always be compiled with all compiler warnings enabled at the highest warning level available, with no errors or warnings resulting.**

This rule should be considered routine practice. This means that the code should compile without errors or warnings issued with the standard gcc compiler, using a command line with minimally the following option flags:

`gcc –Wall –pedantic -std=c11 file.c`

or 

`gcc -Wall -pedantic -std=c++17 file.cpp`

A suggested broader set of gcc compiler flags:
```
-Wtraditional
-Wshadow
-Wpointer-arith
-Wcast-qual
-Wcast-align
-Wstrict-prototypes
-Wmissing-prototypes
-Wconversion
```