# How to properly report issues

This section describes the process of reporting issues to the Argo software team.

Each repository has a pre-made template for reporting issues to make reports more consistent.

## Check Before Doing Anything

It's important that you look through any open issues in a repository before attempting to submit a new issue or work on a change, regardless of the complexity. This will help avoid any duplicates from being made, as well as prevent more than one person working on the same thing at the same time.

If your proposal already exists in an open issue, but you feel there are details missing, comment on the issue to let those involved know of those missing details.

## Creating an Issue

Create a new issue and **read the issue template in its entirety and fill out all applicable sections.** If you aren't sure how to create an issue, you can read the GitHub documentation on [creating an issue from a repository](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/creating-an-issue#creating-an-issue-from-a-repository).

The title of the issue must follow the format described in the issue template.

The more information you are able to provide in your issue, the better. Please attach any crash-logs, screenshots, or videos that can help in resolving an issue.

## Labels
The labels that get applied to issues in our repositories have specific meanings and are broken into two categories: status and type. An issue should only ever have one status label, but can have multiple type labels. The following isn't a complete list, but rather a list of the labels that are more universal across all of our repos.

### Status Labels:

- _**Awaiting Response**_: Waiting for a response from the contributor
- _**Discussion**_: This issue has an ongoing discussion
- _**Do Not Review**_: This issue should not be reviewed until further notice
- _**Duplicate**_: This issue already exists
- _**Help Wanted**_: This issue can be assigned to other contributors
- _**In Progress**_: This issue has ongoing work being done
- _**Invalid**_: This issue is invalid or is not relevant
- _**Needs Review**_: This issue needs an initial or additional review
- _**On Hold**_: There is a temporary hold on any continued work or review
- _**Stale**_: This issue has been inactive for over 30 days and may be closed if inactivity continues
- _**Under Review**_ : This issue is being reviewed by at least one maintainer
- _**Won't Do**_: This issue will not be worked on

### Type Labels:

- _**Accessibility**_: Involves an accessibility feature or requires accessibility review
- _**Bug**_: Involves something that isn't working as intended
- _**Chore**_: Involves changes with no user-facing value, to the build process/internal tooling, refactors, etc.
- _**Documentation**_: Involves an update to the documentation
- _**Easy Fix**_: Involves a minor fix such as grammar, syntax, etc.
- _**Enhancement**_: Involves a new feature or enhancement request

#### 2.1) Priority and severity labels

Issues will always have a priority label. It means how quick something needs to be fixed. There are 4 priority levels:

- _**P1**_: This issue needs immediate attention
- _**P2**_: This issue should be resolved before releasing the update to production
- _**P3**_: This issue should be resolved after all the serious issues are addressed
- _**P4**_: This issue can be resolved in the future and does not require immediate attention

The only issue type that cannot have the `severity` label are enhancements. Severity labels designate how severe a bug is to the functionality of software. There are 4 severity levels:

- _**S1**_: The application crashes, or it becomes unusable / not able to proceed further
- _**S2**_: The functionality is functioning grossly away from the expectations or not doing what it should be doing
- _**S3**_: The software doesn't meet certain criteria or still exhibits some unnatural behavior, however, the functionality as a whole is not impacted.
- _**S4**_: There is almost no impact on the functionality, but it is still a valid defect that should be corrected.